12 Jun 2016

# A platform for digital scholarship

Lately I've been playing with the idea for an app for digital scholarship.  It is one of many of my too many ideas but has a number of things going for it:

  1. It scratches my own itch and solves a serious pain point that I have with academic writing.

  2. There are multiple substitute apps for writing, referencing, and collaboration but none that integrate all three well.

  3. The concept is within my technical skills to realise with a combination of javascript, electron, HTML, and git.

  4. I get to dog food it with someone who lacks technical skills (my supervisor)

  5. It has an added side effect of being an excellent portfolio piece and CV filler.


## The current field

Most academics are still using MS Word, Scrivner, or LaTex.  Everyone has Word installed and they are familiar with it.  It works on multiple platforms and is the defacto standard.  The key problem is that it is proprietry.  This _con_ isn't political but rather utilitarian - you can't diff Word, and it has a limited shelf life. Try openning a Word 98 doc to see what I mean.

Scrivner is a pretty good app from all accounts but I haven't used it.  It costs a bit, is limited to OSX, and has a steeper learning curver.  It will never be ubiquitous.

LaTex is open source and plain text - two big ticks.  It is used widely in Computer Science, Mathematics, Phisics, or anywhere that requires heavey math notation.  The problem is that it has a very steep learning curve, and is difficult to read in raw format.

Reference management apps are a similar hodge podge of pros and cons.  Mendelay, BibTex, EndNote *puke* et al lack the deep integration with writing apps and openness of plain text.


## The Plan

I intend to solve both problems (writing & reference management) along with version control and collaboration thanks to Git.  The writing app will be an iA writer / Ulyssis style minimalist writing app that renders a variety of plain text markdowns/ups.  

The reference manager will be on a concept of distributed, deterministic hashing of citiation data that can be freely shared. I've written about this elsewhere but it will require the formalisation of a markdown flavour for scholars - _latin_ - that incorporates citations as well as footnotes, support for CSLs, and a standardised format for _macros_ like links, images, data, videos etc.

All of this will be supported by an opinionated wrapper for git that is focused on writing prose rather than code.  This will provide version control for individual use but also collaboration with other scholars.

Once complete, the aim is to provide the base infrastructure/tools for academics to work in the 21st century rather than the 19th.  I'm thinking of a pricing structure inspired by Github - $5/month for unlimited priviate projects but open scholarship is free.

Let's see how this goes.